---
layout: page
title: Uses
permalink: /uses/
---

I've been cataloguing the [various iterations of my home
office](https://photos.app.goo.gl/ACREAarZbYRAi4632) for years now, but I
haven't really kept a record of what kit I'm currently using. Here's my attempt
to rectify that.

Have any extra questions that aren't answered here? [Ask me on
Twitter](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?screen_name=bobbyshowalter).

* Contents
{:toc}

* * *

## Desk area

{% include figure.html src='/assets/images/uses/desk_1.jpg' alt='Picture of my
desk' caption='The desk in all its glory' %}

{% include figure.html src='/assets/images/uses/desk_2.jpg' alt='Closer picture
of my desk' caption='' %}

{% include figure.html src='/assets/images/uses/desk_3.jpg' alt='Top-down
view of my desk' caption='Top-down view' %}

{% include figure.html src='/assets/images/uses/desk_detail_left.jpg'
alt='Close up of the left side of my desk' caption='Detail view &ndash; left
side' %}

{% include figure.html src='/assets/images/uses/desk_detail_right.jpg'
alt='Close up of the right side of my desk' caption='Detail view &ndash; right
side' %}

As a general rule, I do everything I can to keep my desk as spotless as
possible. Clean workspace, clean mindset. There are some things that demand a
permanent presence, however. These are the physical doodads that hang around my
desk area.

### The desk

Over the years, I've become more and more obsessed with increasing the total
area of my desk top. The previous version of my home office featured a
[wall-mounted, standing-height
desk](https://photos.app.goo.gl/8U47YDR3SJFcgAJx1) that clocked in at 30 sq.
ft. When we moved the office to add more work space for my wife, I opted for a
more traditional desk so that we would have the flexibility of rearranging the
room at any time.

This current desk is a standard dimension, [solid-core
door](https://www.homedepot.com/p/Masonite-32-in-x-80-in-Smooth-Flush-Unfinished-Hardwood-Solid-Core-Birch-Veneer-Composite-Interior-Door-Slab-25344/100037604)
on top of some [steel tube
legs](https://www.hairpinlegs.com/collections/table-legs/products/tube-leg-no-one).
While it isn't the sprawling expanse that the previous desk was, it certainly
provides plenty of space to spread out.

### MacBook Pro

I'm currently using a 2015 13" MacBook Pro with 8GB of memory and a 512GB SSD.
Three years feels like a long time to use the same MacBook, but it still does
everything I need it to just as fast as the day I got it. For cases where I need
more horsepower, like some development work at Intelliquip, I typically remote
into some sort of server that can be more specially tuned for the task at hand.

I keep my Mac in clamshell mode when I'm at home, and recently grabbed [a
stand](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B0792C2XW7/) to reduce its footprint.
The stand also elevates the laptop off the desk to guard against any accidental
spills.

### Keyboard

This is the item that always grabs attention when I take it out in public. I use
a [Kinesis Freestyle2 Blue Wireless Ergonomic Keyboard for
Mac](https://www.amazon.com/Freestyle2-Wireless-Ergonomic-Keyboard-Separation/dp/B00V6WWYN2/),
with the extra [VIP3 Accessory
Kit](https://www.amazon.com/Accessory-Kinesis-Freestyle2-Keyboard-KIN-FS-VIP3/dp/B008BVNQW4/),
and I can't imagine using anything else. My ergonomic keyboard journey started
with the crowd-favorite [Microsoft Natural Ergonomic Keyboard
4000](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B000A6PPOK/), but after encountering
some muscle strain from constantly reaching across the numpad to use the mouse,
I went searching for something else.

The Kinesis allows my arms to rest in a much more natural position when typing,
as well as freeing up space inside the keyboard for my mouse and notebooks. It
connects over bluetooth and has astonishingly long battery life. Probably the
best thing I have on my desk.

### Mouse

Keeping with the ergonomic theme, I use a [Kensington Expert Wireless Trackball
Mouse](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B01936N73I/) as my input device of
choice. Using just my finger tips to move the mouse is a massive relief to the
normal strain of using more arm and wrist muscles to move a traditional device.

It isn't perfect&mdash;there are occasional connection quirks when waking the Mac
from sleep, and using its bluetooth option when other bluetooth devices are
connected to the Mac just doesn't work well at all&mdash;but it's still a huge
improvement over what I had.

### Displays and stand

The pair of Dell S2340M monitors on my desk are two of the oldest tech items I
still use. They only have DVI, so I use a couple of [Mini DisplayPort to DVI
cables](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B01KAM3ICO/) to connect them to my
Mac. They also aren't VESA compatible, so I use [some
adapters](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B076234KMD/) to mount them to the
[monitor stand](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B009S750LA/).

I also have an [Insignia Roku
TV](https://www.bestbuy.com/site/insignia-39-class-38-5-diag--led-1080p-smart-hdtv-roku-tv/4863802.p?skuId=4863802)
mounted next to my desk as a tertiary display. I can connect to it via HDMI if
necessary, but I typically just use its smart features and a [2015
Chromecast](https://store.google.com/product/chromecast_2015) to put on
background media.

### Speakers and sound

For personal music and video playing, I have the [Logitech
Z623](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B003VAHYTG/) system hooked up to my Mac.
For more general background music, and audio from the Roku TV, I have a pair of
Bose bookshelf speakers wired up with a [Chromecast
Audio](https://store.google.com/product/chromecast_audio). This allows anyone in
the office to control the music without tying up any one person's workstation.

### Phone

I'm currently rocking the [Moto
E4+](https://www.amazon.com/Moto-Plus-4th-Generation-Lockscreen/dp/B072ZS6JD2/)
from Motorola (plus [this nifty folio
case](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B0789V3VW3/)). I've used my fair share
of the "latest and greatest" phones, but they all fall short in one key area:
the battery. It doesn't matter how great the advertised battery life is, they
always seem to falter when subjected to normal, continuous use.

Last year (2017), after falling victim to the infamous Nexus 6P battery issue and
increasingly terrible experiences with Google Project Fi, I decided I had
enough. The E4+ is about as uninspiring a phone as could possibly be, but it has
a 5000mAH battery and can easily last three days on a single charge.

### Miscellaneous

Here are the rest of the items on and around my desk that don't need as much
explanation:

- [AmazonBasics USB hub](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B00E6GX4BG/)
- [Jabra Speak 410 USB
  Speakerphone](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B007SHJIO2/) for meetings and
phone calls
- [Toshiba 1TB Portable HDD](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B00N2S6ZUQ/)
  for a TimeMachine backup
- [Field Notes](https://fieldnotesbrand.com/products/pitch-black-memo) and
  [Moleskine](https://us.moleskine.com/en/cahier-journal-brown/p0408) notebooks
- [Cross ballpoint pen](https://www.cross.com/en/products/3502)
- Desk organizer from [Stone-Penland
  Pottery](https://www.facebook.com/stonepenlandpottery/)
- [Safco Foot Cushion](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B001MS6XW8/)

* * *

## Software

*coming soon*
