---
layout: post
title: "ðŸŽ¨ New Theme"
---

I'm a little late on this, but I finally took the time to put a new theme
together. Here are some of the highlights.

{% include toc.md %}

## A look back

After two and a half years of the spartan, utilitarian look, I decided it was
time to freshen up the place a bit. That original theme was not without its
purpose&mdash;consuming content on the web can be exhausting, so I wanted a
place where I could provide content free from all the shackles of modern web
presentation. I didn't use any analytics (still don't), the colors I did use
were slight tweaks on the browser defaults, and the font stack was whatever your
operating system gave you.

{% include figure.html src='/assets/images/redesign/previous.png' alt='Previous
design of bshow.co, featuring a rather bland appearance' caption="It's called
MVP for a reason, right?" %}

As much as I did quite like the minimalist approach, it started to feel like I
was sending the wrong signals. I consider myself a designer, after all, so
shouldn't my site have at least some personality?

## Starting over

I started my little redesign by scouring the web for inspiration. There are
certainly lots of hot ðŸ”¥ trends these days, but I still wanted to keep things on
the more low-key side.

{% include figure.html src='/assets/images/redesign/rough_sketch.jpg' alt='Rough
wireframe-style sketch of the new website home page, drawn with digital ink
on a dot grid' caption='Home page sketch in Goodnotes 5' %}

The home page is the obvious choice for injecting a little bit of flair. I took
to Goodnotes on my iPad and started sketching up some ideas. The above wireframe
is what I finally settled on&mdash;a layered intro section with a picture and a
text blurb, then two massive links to featured portfolio and blog items.

With a goal in mind, I hopped over to
[CodePen](https://codepen.io/bobbyshowalter/pen/69870e7eff425d59fcca5318f97ef553)
to get a feel for how this design could work. I also grabbed a color scheme from
[Color Hunt](https://colorhunt.co/palette/168262).

{% include figure.html src='/assets/images/redesign/colors.png' alt='New color
palette of lighter and darker shades of a lavender-like purple, red, and orange'
caption='A nice departure from black on white' %}

{% include figure.html src='/assets/images/redesign/mockup.png' alt='HTML and
CSS mockup of new home page' caption='CodePen is a great environment for sussing
things out without worrying about scaffolding a particular dev setup' %}

Getting into code made it simple to start experimenting with the color and
layout beyond what my simple sketch could have done. I rotated my headshot
picture a bit and added some gradients to the featured content links.

Personality! ðŸ˜Ž

## More than just a pretty face

With the home page in place, it was time to tackle&hellip;well, everything else.

I quite like a "featured image" on a blog post when it's done well. Trouble is,
coming up with an appropriate image for every post is an extra chore that I'm
just not interested in. Luckily, neat services like
[Unsplash](https://source.unsplash.com/) exist. I had read that the Birmingham
Museums Trust uploaded a large collection of their [watercolour
paintings](https://unsplash.com/collections/9248817/watercolour) for use, so I
wired up my post headers to pull a random image from their collection at every
page load. That way every post gets a pleasing picture without having to spend
any time thinking about it. I may come back at some point and enhance the post
layout by allowing for a defined featured image, but this works great for now.

The typography received a great deal of attention as well. I'm still using the
same `70ch`-wide body text column as before, but now it is set within a larger
page grid that allows for much more creativity. I pulled the list punctuation
out into the left margin (except on smaller views where it could get lost against
the edge of the browser), bumped up the base `font-size`, and even opted for a
new typeface duo of [Archivo](https://fonts.google.com/specimen/Archivo) and
[Archivo Black](https://fonts.google.com/specimen/Archivo+Black).

## That's all&hellip;for now

I think that about takes care of the important updates. It took over a [dozen
commits](https://github.com/orangedaisy/bshowco/issues/12) to get here, but I'm
pleased with the result and have enjoyed working with this new look as I
continue to make content updates.

Is it finished? Gosh, no. I have some cleanup to do to make the page and post
styles a little <abbr title="Don't Repeat Yourself">DRY</abbr>-er. Dark themes
are just about expected these days, so I need to figure that out as well. But
I'll get there eventually, perhaps on a day where I need a mental break or spark
of joy from more stressful situations. That's what makes this such a great
[worry stone](https://ethanmarcotte.com/wrote/let-a-website-be-a-worry-stone/).
